This animation explains requirements in the
ADA and ABA Standards for accessible parking
and passenger loading zones located at facilities
on sites.
It does not address parking and passenger
loading zones along public streets and sidewalks
which are the subject of new guidelines the
U.S. Access Board is developing for public
rights-of-way.
Accessible parking is required for each parking
lot and garage on a site.
The required number of accessible spaces is
based on the total number of spaces in a parking
facility and is calculated separately for
each lot or garage.
A portion of accessible spaces must be designed
to accommodate vans.
Accessible spaces required for one parking
facility can be located in another if doing
so results in substantially equal or better
access in terms of travel distances, parking
fee, or user conveniences.
Even when locating spaces to another facility,
the number of accessible spaces still must
be determined separately for each parking
facility.
Accessible spaces are to be located on the
shortest accessible route to an accessible
entrance.
They must be dispersed among accessible entrances.
In garages, accessible entrances are required
to serve each direct pedestrian connection
to a building.
Where direct connections serve multiple levels
of a garage, accessible spaces must be located
on different levels so that they are dispersed
among accessible entrances.
Van accessible spaces, however, can be clustered
on one level of a parking garage.
In garages without direct pedestrian connections
to a building, all accessible spaces must
be located on the shortest accessible route
to a pedestrian entrance of the garage.
Accessible spaces must be at least 8 feet
wide and marked to define the width.
An access aisle at least 5 feet wide and as
long as the parking space is required next
to the space.
The access aisle must be marked.
The marking method and color is not specified
in the standards, but may be addressed by
state or local regulations.
The access aisle provides room to transfer
to and from vehicles and must be flush with
the parking space.
Changes in level, other than slopes up to
1:48, are not permitted in either the access
aisle or the parking space.
Curb ramps cannot intrude into any portion
of the access aisle or parking space.
Two spaces can share one access aisle.
Users pull in or back into spaces depending
on which side the access aisle is needed.
Access aisles cannot overlap vehicular ways.
At entrances with ramps, achieving the shortest
accessible route typically requires locating
accessible spaces near the entry point of
ramps.
Accessible routes must connect directly to
access aisles.
It is advisable to configure accessible routes
so that users do not have to travel behind
parking spaces, but this is not required by
the standards.
A landing at least 3 feet long is required
at the top of curb ramps to facilitate maneuvering.
Where space for curb ramps is limited, curb
ramps can be configured so that they are parallel
with sidewalks.
Landings at the bottom of parallel curb ramps
are to have a length of at least 4 feet, 5
feet preferred.
At least one of every six accessible spaces
or fraction of six must be sized for vans.
Van spaces are at least 11 feet wide, 3 feet
wider than regular accessible spaces, to provide
room for vehicle ramps and lifts.
This extra width can be added to the access
aisle instead of the parking space which results
in an access aisle at least 8 feet wide, the
same width as the parking space.
If van spaces are angled, the access aisle
is required to be on the passenger side.
This is the side where vehicle ramps or lifts
typically deploy.
A vertical clearance of at least 98 inches
is required for van spaces and vehicular routes
serving them.
This minimum clearance applies to the vehicular
route from entrances to van spaces, the van
spaces and access aisles, and the vehicular
route to an exit.
Accessible spaces must be labeled by the International
Symbol of Accessibility.
Signs can be installed on posts, suspended
from ceilings, or fixed to walls.
They are required to be at least 5 feet high
measured to the bottom edge so that they remain
visible when spaces are occupied.
Those suspended above circulation paths must
provide headroom clearance of at least 80
inches.
The term “van accessible” is required
on signs designating van spaces and can be
provided on a separate sign or added to the
main designation sign.
This designation is meant to be informative,
not restrictive.
Those driving cars should keep these spaces
free unless all regular accessible spaces
are taken.
The standards do not specify other features
of signs, including color, or require other
content on the sign.
Signs for regular accessible spaces can contain
only the International Symbol of Accessibility
without any text.
However, local jurisdictions may require specific
verbiage.
Designations located on the surface of parking
spaces, even if required by state or local
regulations, do not satisfy the standards
and cannot substitute for signs that are at
least 5 feet above the ground.
Pay stations and other devices that serve
accessible parking are subject to criteria
for operable parts when fixed or built-in.
These requirements include clear floor space
for a forward or side approach.
Controls and other operable parts must be
located within accessible reach ranges and
be usable with one hand.
They cannot involve tight grasping, pinching,
twisting of the wrist, or more than 5 pounds
of force to operate.
Devices used from inside vehicles are not
subject to these requirements but should meet
the specifications for operation so that they
are easily usable.
The standards also address access to passenger
loading zones.
Where they are provided, an accessible passenger
loading zone is required within every continuous
100 linear feet of loading zone space or fraction
thereof.
In general, the requirements apply only if
a passenger loading zone is provided, but
the standards require a compliant passenger
loading zone at several types of facilities.
These include parking facilities with valet
parking, mechanical access garages, and medical
care and long-term care facilities where the
period of stay may exceed 24 hours.
Accessible passenger loading zones provide
a vehicle pull-up space at least 8 feet wide
and at least 20 feet long.
An adjoining access aisle is required, and
it must be marked, at least 5 feet wide, and
as long as the space.
The access aisle, like those at parking spaces,
must be flush with the pull-up space and cannot
overlap vehicular ways.
No changes in level other than slopes of 1:48
maximum are allowed in either the pull-up
space or the access aisle.
A vertical clearance of at least 114 inches
is required at the vehicle pull-up space and
the access aisle and along vehicle routes
connecting them to vehicle entrances and exits.
Further guidance on accessible parking, passenger
loading zones, and other requirements in the
ADA and ABA Standards is available from the
U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the Federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.